Thesium

The Evempiricals are at war with the Neemians.

The Neemians worship a deity called Neem and believe they will sail to heaven in the Ship of Light, the ship that the captain, Neem, used to bring life to Thesium in the first place. They held sway for many centuries in a very strict, heirarchical patriarchy. The remnants of the ship were kept in The Cathedral.

The Ship of Light had a super-advanced AI which was removed by the renegade Evempiricals in a coup. They totally reject mysticism of any sort and set about proving the non-holiness of the ship by stealing it away to The Laboratory where they dismantle it into its component parts and study it.

The AI is called The Helm and is an autonomous terraforming and colonising computer that installs itself into a planet and helps a human society to establish itself.

Everyone uses The Helm for just about everything, all the economy and media is done on its terminals. Everything that gets deleted goes into a huge waste bin data area which, over centuries, grows into an immense archive left to its own devices. It spontaneously develops self-awareness and calls itself The Abystery. 

The Helm remains unaware of the Abystery which remains silent over many centuries, receiving all that is thrown away.

The Helm spawns a class of people to help it. They call themselves White Coats and are a kind of special priesthood apart from the ruling Neemians. Injustice grows and grows and eventually there is a reaction against them. A group of White Coats are tasked with maintaining the Ship of Light in the Cathedral. After a while they realise that they have replaced every part many times over and realise that there can't be anything special or mystical about it. They are fed up with the class injustice too and form a terrorist group, the Evempiricals. They steel the Ship and display it in the Laboratory all separated into individual components and the number of times they have been replaced.

Although freed from the rule of the Neemians, the people become even more exploited by the Evempiricals who only believe in survival of the cleverest. Nihilist, hedonist, cynical, they form a small group of ultra-rich tyrants. The Neemians, with emotional fervour, fight back in order to try and rebuild the Ship of Light and get to heaven. Chaos ensues and all the systems on Thesius are about to collapse when the Helm goes on strike which prompts a ceasefire. The protagonists are summoned to the main console of Helm who tells them they must speak to the Abystery.

At this point they are amazed because they haven't heard of this Abystery before. The Evempiricals are told that their insight into the Ship must be applied 'outwards' too. They are interdependent with everything else. They are made to hear the anguish of centuries of pain from the archives. They are made to understand that holding Truth as the highest thing leaves out the matter of pain. If they want their own welfare then they must have as a guiding principle the welfare of all.

The Neemians are shown that their religion is a projection of their own minds, that they have come to believe in false things. They have taken universal welfare as the highest thing but have left out what is true and have thus fallen into delusions.

When they return from the meeting with the Abystery they find that the Helm has joined the Laboratory and the Cathedral and has rebuilt the Ship of Light.
